# Experimental evolution of _Bacteroides uniformis_ uncovers the role of membrane transporters in adaptation to xenobiotics

Gut bacteria routinely encounter chemicals like drugs, pollutants, and food additives. Many of these xenobiotics are known to affect bacterial physiology suggesting that they can contribute to genetic adaptation. However, this is difficult to causally assess in vivo since the exposure cannot be controlled. Using a controlled laboratory evolution approach, we examined genetic changes in Bacteroides uniformis, a prevalent and abundant gut bacterium, in response to 37 common xenobiotics.  These include 24 drugs, six environmental contaminants, four food additives, and three natural food compounds. Genome sequences of the evolved populations revealed 306 variants, spanning 14 coordinates, with allele frequency >50%.  These coordinates indicate genomic regions with high evolvability or those involved in general response to xenobiotics.  Mutations were frequently observed in both the coding and upstream regulatory regions of tandem SusC/D genes, which are involved in cross-membrane transport. Further, xenobiotic-specific mutations affected genes encoding membrane transporters, such as efflux pumps, which play a role in antibiotic resistance. In accord, isolates evolved in the presence of xanthan gum, a common food additive, showed a four-to-eight-fold increase in resistance to erythromycin. Our data brings forward the central role of membrane transporters in gut bacterial adaptation to xenobiotics and in collateral resistance to antibiotics.

# Data and code

This repository contains raw growth data, vcf files generated after running _snippy_ pipeline, as well as scripts for data visulization.

Raw sequencing data was uploaded to European Nucleotide Archive with public access under session ID [PRJEB72819](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB72819) (including Nanopore sequencing reads of parental strain and Illumina NextSeq genomic sequencing reads of evolved populations).

# Repository structure
In this repository, you will find the following subfolders:
  - __00.data__
      This folder contains data used for analyses and visulization, including: chemical SMILES for all compounds used in the adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) experiment, the reference genome of the parental strain assembled from Nanopore and Illumina sequencing data, OD readings, vcf file of all genetic variants called by [snippy](https://github.com/tseemann/snippy).
  - __01.scripts_growth__
      Scripts for analyzing growth data and generating main Figure 1 and supplementary Figures S1 to S3.
  - __02.scripts_variants__
      Scripts for variants analysis and visulization, including main Figure 2 and supplementary Figures S4 to S5.
  - __03.scripts_abx__
      Scripts for processing and visulizing antibiotic resistance screen result, including main Figure 3 and supplementary Figures S7 to S10.
  - __04.results__
      Intermidiate results and significant test results from data processing. 
  - __05.figures__
      Figures generated by scripts (folder 01 to 03).
  - __06.tables__
      Tables generated by scripts (folder 01 to 03).

# Authors and contributors
This repository is written by [Rui Guan](https://github.com/Guan06), follow me on Bluesky at [guan06rui.bsky.social](https://bsky.app/profile/guan06rui.bsky.social).
